---
title: "Contradiction and Inconsistency: Different… But The Same. (+ some thoughts on 3-valued logics)"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
conference: The Inaugural Symposium on Logic in the Arab World
venue: "Kuwait University"
date: February 2025
location: "Kuwait City, Kuwait"
---
**Abstract**

In various philosophical fields people usually distinguish between a contradiction (having a 
pair of statements which one is the negation of the other) and an inconsistency (having a pair 
of statements which cannot both be true, but both can be false): Strawson (1952) differentiates 
between them on logical grounds. About beliefs, Foley (1979) regards inconsistent beliefs as 
posing a serious problem, but not as serious as contradictory beliefs. Concerning quantum 
mechanics, Arenhart and Krause (2016) argue that quantum superpositions (the multiple states 
a quantum system is in before measurement) is an example of an inconsistent situation, not of 
a contradictory one. Concerning the history of science, Vickers (2013) holds that it can be the 
case that inconsistencies in scientific theories (e.g. in Bohr’s theory of the atom and in 
Newtonian cosmology) may not eventually reach a contradiction.

What these cases have in common is that they see an inconsistency as being less serious than 
a contradiction. The main sentiment seems to be that ‘it is just a mere inconsistency. It is serious 
and we need to deal with it, but at least it is not a contradiction'. And since these two are taken 
to lie on different problematic levels, different ways of solving them are needed. In science, for 
example, if an inconsistency is detected in our theories, then we can tolerate it for a bit until a 
solution is found. Whereas if a contradiction arises, then we need to immediately stop 
everything else and try to solve it. The reason is simple: classical logic, which is usually taken
to be the underlying logic of (reasoning in) science, can work with inconsistencies but it cannot 
tolerate contradictions. A contradiction would lead to logical explosion and render the theory 
as useless. I concede that prima facie there is a difference between them.

In this paper, however, I want to argue that an inconsistency always involves a contradiction:
it is just ‘hidden’, but it is still there and poses the same problems as a plain and explicit 
contradiction. To show how and why this is the case, I will use an example from the history of 
science where there was an inconsistency between theory and observation. Because an example 
from the history of science will be used, it is important to say that scientists (at least in some 
degree) have to follow the rules of logic in their reasoning and workings in order to avoiding 
unwarranted conclusions. The reason can be derived from Dewey (even though the context 
here differs from what he had in mind when writing this): “To engage in an inquiry is like 
entering into a contract. It commits the inquirer to observance of certain conditions. A 
stipulation is a statement of conditions that are agreed to in the conduct of some affair [and it 
is] first implicit in the undertaking of inquiry” (Dewey 1938: 16).

This paper will take on an example raised in Priest (2002). Namely, with the precession of the 
perihelion of Mercury’s orbit between prediction (5776 seconds of arcs per century) and actual 
observation (5600 seconds). On the face of it, one will notice that this does not show a clear 
contradiction. 5600 is not the negation of 5557. Furthermore, both (propositions) can be false 
if the actual precession of Mercury’s orbit is 4000 seconds. Let p be ‘5600 seconds’ and let q
be ‘5557 seconds’. q implies the following set of propositions: ‘not 5000 seconds’; ‘not 5100 
seconds’; ‘not 5600 seconds’; and so on for all rational positive real numbers. That is, we have 
a situation in which q essentially implies (¬r & ¬s & … & ¬p). From this, I argue that we can 
derive p ꓥ ¬p, which is a contradiction. The main point here is that the mere appearance of a 
conjunction (the addition of further elements in one of the two propositions) does not change 
the fact that a contradiction is still in place. I will be following Strawson in that by applying “a 
predicate to something, we implicitly exclude from application to that thing the predicates 
which lie outside the boundaries of the predicate we apply” (Strawson 1952: 6).

It is important to attend this issue because the treatment or the explanation given for a 
contradiction in the sciences depends on whether we consider the said issue as a contradiction 
or not. In other words, we first need to correctly identify the problem in order to then try and 
find a fitting solution or explanation for it.

To conclude, some further thoughts will be given regarding (any) implications this analysis 
might have on multivalued logics and, more specifically, for 3-valued logics.

*Bibliography:*
1) Arenhart, J. R. B., & Krause, D. (2016). CONTRADICTION, QUANTUM MECHANICS, 
AND THE SQUARE OF OPPOSITION. Logique et Analyse, 235, 301–315. 
https://www.jstor.org/stable/26767830
2) Dewey, J. (1938). Logic. The Theory of Inquiry, New York
3) Foley, R. (1979). Justified Inconsistent Beliefs. American Philosophical Quarterly, 16(4), 247–257.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/20009767
4) Priest. G. (2002) Inconsistency and the Empirical Sciences. In: Meheus J. (eds) Inconsistency 
in Science. Origins (Studies in the sources of scientific creativity), vol 2. Springer, 
Dordrecht. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-017-0085-6_7
5) Strawson, P.F. (1952). Introduction to Logical Theory. London, England: Routledge.
6) Vickers, P. (2013) Understanding Inconsistent Science, Oxford University Press.
